---
layout: post
title:  "FOSS, DH, and the Future of the Internet - Part 1"
date:   2023-02-19 18:33:19 -0400
categories: FOSS
---
In late January, the Society for History in the Federal Government (SHFG) put out a call for papers for their annual conference. SFHG is dedicated to supporting historical work done by people working for government agencies, enhancing the scholarship of researchers using government sources, in supporting public access to federal history in all its forms. This year, the society decided to theme the conference around digital/web projects, records, outreach, and education. Looking backward to the archive closures and limitations associated with physical spaces during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic and looking forward to the National Archives and Records Administration's upcoming mandate that all federal agencies manage their records electronically, it's clear that the digital will increasingly define the way that federal records in history are accessed, preserved, and distributed.

Given that the PubMed topic modeling project I am working on is supported by the NIH and relies on its databases of contemporary and historical scientific research papers, I wanted to contribute to SHFG's conference. However, my project still needs to be completed, so I don't have any concrete findings to share. Fortunately, SHFG allows for the submission of round table panels, which are typically more casual than traditional paper sessions and also allow for significant interaction with the audience. I would greatly benefit from the audience feedback that typically accompanies a roundtable, and I felt that this would be the best way for me to contribute.

Finding colleagues to participate in putting together a panel was surprisingly easy. I knew another student in my department who was experimenting with DH techniques, and it was reasonably easy to find other grad students with similar interests at nearby universities. However, we all worked on very different digital projects, ranging from the natural language processing I use to UI/UX design for public-facing educational websites. Some of us had done DH purely in an academic context, while others had experience working full-time for government agencies on historical research, websites, or historic preservation projects. Nevertheless, we found a throughline that thematically connected our diverse DH experiences.

We decided to focus the roundtable on a discussion of the potential for a strong reciprocal relationship between digital humanities practices and the principles of public history. When federal agencies create accessible archives, scholars involved in digital humanities can more easily create projects that inform the public about the federal government's activities and raise awareness of the resources and tools made available through government agencies. Conversely, digital humanists who think critically about sustainability, preservation, and other public history principles can create new datasets and archives that become lasting contributions to the body of material maintained by federal agencies. This theme emerged from discussing our trials, tribulations, and successes when accessing federal records for our projects. At the same time, those who had worked in the federal government had seen innovative DH projects begin, expend significant resources, and then disappear in a short time because the project team had extensively considered the project's sustainability or longevity in their planning.

And here, we finally arrive at the FOSS acronym in the title. FOSS stands for "free and open-source software" (also known as FLOSS, free/libre and open-source software). In many ways, FOSS is more of an ideological movement than a description of a particular computing practice. The idea behind FOSS is that users should be free to understand how the software they use works and modify it to suit their needs. To create this freedom, developers make the source code for their software publicly accessible and often accept community contributions to the codebase. FOSS software starkly contrasts with the proprietary, commercialized, "black boxes" that web users interact with most frequently. As shown by recent scandals around Twitter changing API rules, the continual angst around what content the "YouTube algorithm" does and does not promote, and the "discovery" (though FOSS advocates would tell you this is not news) that Microsoft sends Windows 11 user's data to third parties without their consent, proprietary software can behave in ways contrary to user's interests without their knowledge.

While the F in FOSS stands for free as in freedom, rather than free as in free of cost, most FOSS software is accessible to users without requiring payment. However, in some cases, you may need specific hardware and technical knowledge to self-host, build, or otherwise use the software without paying. This feature of FOSS can create problems, as we'll discuss more extensively in Part 2, but it has numerous advantages for DH. For projects like mine, using FOSS or free (even if not open source) software can make the project much more sustainable and less resource intensive. Machine learning techniques and interactive, dynamic websites are frequently accompanied by large code bases, backend servers, and other web infrastructure that can be difficult to maintain without continual funding and significant technical expertise. In my SFHG presentation, I hope to foreground the potential of FOSS software to align DH projects with minimal computing principles and make them more accessible and sustainable in the long term.

Looking beyond DH, FOSS also has the potential to drastically alter current economic arrangements. Proprietary software extracts enormous economic value from individuals and private businesses. Intellectual property rights associated with proprietary software have also been a defining feature of technological development on the web and in computing. However, FOSS projects may struggle with their own sustainability and longevity because they lack legally enforceable revenue streams. Given that much of the web is built on FOSS software to some degree, a failing FOSS project can have many negative downstream impacts, even for proprietary projects and users with no interest in the FOSS community or its ideologies. I'll discuss the summits and valleys associated with FOSS in Part 2 of this article.
