---
layout: post
title:  "On Collaboration"
date:   2023-03-02 15:33:19 -0400
categories: PubMedTM
---
Scholars can hardly agree on what defines digital humanities (DH), but many agree that interdisciplinarity is a core feature. Much like the growing field of science and technology studies (STS), DH is more of an amalgamation of techniques, methodologies, and areas of interest that the academic community has chosen to stick under one somewhat arbitrary label to make work in the field more legible to the traditional university structure and external funding entities. Academics interested in DH are very quickly exposed to the numerous meanings of the term. They can often quickly understand what DH looks like in the context of their discipline, even if they don't fully grasp the depth and breadth of all DH work scholars are conducting in all other fields. At the same time, I have seen substantial commentary from DH scholars on the best practices for communicating with other academics outside of one's field. This commentary is often aimed at addressing difficulties with communication and collaboration between humanists and computer scientists. However, I have found that it can be challenging to explain my DH work to members of the public or people without graduate training in either the humanities or computer sciences—a problem not dissimilar to the challenges identified by scholars who study natural science communication (Carroll 2022). This piece reflects on two highlights from my recent experience trying to find collaborators for my DH project and, in the process, trying to explain my project to people outside of the humanities and social sciences.

This saga begins with a post on the r/ProgrammingBuddies subreddit. As the name suggests, this subreddit is dedicated to finding buddies to work on programming projects. People frequently create posts seeking an accountability partner as they start online web developer training programs like the Odin Project. However, posters have also solicited collaborators interested in building commercial applications or tech startups. While I was familiar with the subreddit, I had never posted or engaged with any of the posts I'd seen before. I made a post that vaguely described my interest in doing a data science project using academic research papers. To my surprise, it quickly garnered several replies.

One of the challenges with finding collaborators on any platform (or in real life) is vetting an individual to determine if they are reliable, trustworthy, and someone you would want to work with. This task is made an order of magnitude more difficult on Reddit, where accounts are essentially anonymized. However, you can view an account's comment and post history. These data points can sometimes provide a lot of information about the account holder. One person who contacted me seemed very engaged and had much to say about my project and the concepts of topic modeling and digital humanities. Through our conversation, I learned that he has a BS in Computer Science. He appeared quite knowledgeable about that field. However, after viewing his post history, I realized this was not someone who I would want to work with. Without going into unnecessary detail, there was a large amount of unsavory commentary on his profile. Nothing I saw was illegal or in violation of Reddit's terms and services or content policies, but I believe there was a high likelihood that this individual would bring controversy to the project if they became a named the collaborator. I felt bad for judging this person purely on their Internet history, but I think this kind of vetting is an unfortunate necessity given the nature of the platform and the type of project I'm pursuing.

Another conversation began with a discussion of our backgrounds and interests. By the time this individual (who I will refer to as Anto) reached out to me, I had already chatted with a few other people. I was experimenting with the best messaging to use when explaining my work and my academic background. In my conversation with Anto, I said I did science and technology studies, which I described as "studying how/why scientists do what they do and why technology changes the way it does." This prompted an interesting response: "So is it more from philosophical/theoretical point of view rather than a strictly methodological/statistical point of view? How do you implement programming for that that exactly?" In the first question, Anto proved that my explanation of STS effectively illustrated the critical and philosophical nature of my research inquiries – a success in my communication strategy. However, the second question made me realize how difficult it is to explain an idea that can easily be (and frequently has been) the subject of entire monographs or semester-long courses. I had no idea how to condense all the information I had gained from my time studying STS into a few sentences I could type into a Reddit DM. Should I address the question of how computational humanities works broadly? Or should I discuss how I implement programming in my specific project? Do I provide examples of the types of research questions that a scholar would be able to answer with programming? If so, how do I continue to emphasize the humanistic and philosophical nature of the inquiry despite the ostensible focus on computational methods?

Ultimately, my solution to this problem was to let others talk for me. I provided a brief description of how scholars can use computational tools to answer humanities questions, as I do in my project. However, I referred Anto to some other publicly available readings on the meaning of DH and STS, including open-access pieces like [Matthew Kirschenbaum's introductory chapter in Debates in the Digital Humanities] [dh-debates] as well as the [introductory lecture to the Foundations & Applications of Humanities Analytics] [humanities-analytics] course created by David Kinney and Simon DeDeo. In the end, Anto seemed interested in the project and in learning more about the field. We resolved to stay in touch and try to collaborate on this project at the start of April when our schedules would open up.

I look forward to seeing how this unusual partnership continues to unfold.

### Sources

Carroll, Aaron E. 2022. _Science Communication Matters_. Healthcare Triage. [https://www.healthcaretriage.info/podcast/science-communication-matters][healthcare-triage].

[dh-debates]: https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/read/untitled-88c11800-9446-469b-a3be-3fdb36bfbd1e/section/fcd2121c-0507-441b-8a01-dc35b8baeec6#intro

[humanities-analytics]: https://www.complexityexplorer.org/courses/162-foundations-applications-of-humanities-analytics

[healthcare-triage]: https://www.healthcaretriage.info/podcast/science-communication-matters